Advanced configurations with kubeadm (Kustomize) (#1159)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/20190722-Advanced-configurations-with-kubeadm-(Kustomize).md

  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] kubernetes/enhancements issue in release milestone, which links to KEP
- [x] KEP approvers have set the KEP status to `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented
- [x] Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [x] Graduation criteria is in place
- [x] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

This KEP is aimed at defining a new kubeadm feature that will allow users to bootstrap 
a Kubernetes cluster with configuration options - control-plane or kubelet settings -

> not supported by the Kubeadm config API.

Author: done

## Motivation

Kubeadm currently allows you to define a limited set of configuration options for a
Kubernetes cluster via the Kubeadm config API or the corresponding CLI flags.
More specifically it allows:

1. To define configurations settings at cluster level using the `ClusterConfiguration`
   config object 
2. To define a limited set of configurations at the node level using the

>    `NodeRegistrationOptions` object or the `localAPIEndpoint` object

Author: good point, created https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/1682 to track this side note

The above set of configurations covers the most common use cases, but there are other
use cases that cannot be achieved with kubeadm config API as of today. Some examples:

- It is not possible to set/alter timeouts for liveness probes in control plane components.
- It is not possible to set/alter kubelet eviction policy at the node level. 

> 

Author: added

A common workaround for those limitations is to manually alter static pod manifests
or kubelet configuration after kubeadm init/join, but this is error-prone and changes

> are not preserved during upgrades.

Reviewer: Not so sure about this. It is always the best to have one and only definitive source of configuration. For cluster wide settings this is ClusterConfiguration. Over those settings we can have layers of "patches" that can mutate specific things for the local node.
If we start respecting static pods on disk, we end up with a couple of places that store configuration and it is very hard (to say the least) if not impossible to reconcile them upon upgrade.
Hence, I am a big fan of the Kustomize idea (although not so much about the Kustomize implementation).

> are not preserved during upgrades.

Author: > I think partially the problem we are trying to solve with kustomizations is the result of a deficiency of our upgrade process.

IMO the need for flexibility origins in `kubeadm init` and `kubeadm join` and this is where kustomization/this KEP applies in the first place; then only in a second moment, we should address the problem of how to preserve those customizations during upgrades.

> we should respect the static Pod object on disk and not re-create the new manifests 

Considering that we can preserve customizations across upgrades without altering the upgrade logic, it is something I prefer to KEP out of the scope of the first release of this KEP/proposal.
BTW, I'm not sure that patching existing manifests is the right thing to do...

> are not preserved during upgrades.

Author: done

This KEP aims to overcome the limitations of the kubeadm config API by introducing a
new feature for defining “advanced configuration” for:

> - control-plane static pod manifests stored into `/etc/kubernetes/manifests`.

Author: point taken, etcd is now in scope

- To clarify what is in the scope of kubeadm and what instead should be the responsibility
  of the users/of higher-level tools in the stack like e.g. cluster API 

### Non-Goals

- To provide any validation or guarantee about the security, conformance, 
  consistency, of “advanced configurations” for control-plane or kubelet settings. 
  As it is already for `extraArgs` fields in the kubeadm config API or in the
  Kubelet/KubeProxy component config, the responsibility of proper usage of those 
  advanced configuration options belongs to higher-level tools/user's.
- To deprecate the Kubeadm config API because:
  - The config API defines a clear contract with kubeadm and the users.
  - The config API is well suited for most common use cases and it will remain the
    recommended way to define core settings for a cluster.
  - The config API implicitly defines the main cluster variants the kubeadm team 
    is committed to support and monitor in the Kubernetes test grid.
- To define how to manage “advanced configurations” for the etcd static pod manifest 
  (this is postponed until kubeadm - [`etcdadm`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/etcdadm)

>   project integration).

Author: point taken, etcd is now in scope

- To define how to manage “advanced configurations” for the addons 
  (this is postponed until kubeadm - [`addons`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/addon-operators) 
  project integration).
- To define a solution for “advanced configurations” for the controller-manager

>   component config (still WIP upstream; not yet integrated with kubeadm)

Author: I removed the misleading sentence

## Proposal

### User Stories 

#### Story 1

> As a cluster administrator, I want to set kubelet eviction policy for a joining node

Author: done, kubelet is now out of scope of the 1st iteration

according to the node hardware features.

#### Story 2
As a cluster administrator, I want to set timeouts for the kube-apiserver liveness
probes for edge clusters.

#### Story 3
As a cluster administrator, I want to upgrade my cluster preserving all the
“advanced configuration” already in place

### Implementation Details

This proposal explores as a first option for implementing Kubeadm 

> “advance configrations“ the usage of Kustomize; please refer to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
“advanced configurations“ the usage of Kustomize; please refer to
```

[Declarative application management in Kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/design-proposals/architecture/declarative-application-management.md)
and [Kustomize KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-cli/0008-kustomize.md)
for background information about Kustomize.

> Support for "advanced configrations“/kustomize in kubeadm will be available under

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Support for "advanced configurations“/kustomize in kubeadm will be available under
```

> a new feature-flag named `kustomize`, initially alpha and disabled by default.

Author: point taken, no more feature flag

#### Kustomize integration with kubeadm

By adopting Kustomize in the context of Kubeadm, this proposal assumes to:

- Let kubeadm generate static pod manifests or kubelet configuration as usual.
- Use kubeadm generated artifacts as a starting point for applying patches
  containing “advanced configurations”.

This has some implications:

1. The higher-level tools/users have to express “advanced configurations” using
   one of the two alternative techniques supported by Kustomize - the [strategic
   merge patch](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize/blob/master/docs/glossary.md#patchstrategicmerge)
   and the [JSON patch](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize/blob/master/docs/glossary.md#patchjson6902) -.
2. The higher-level tools/users have to provide patches before running kubeadm;
   this point is going to be further discussed in the following paragraphs.
3. Kubeadm is responsible for coordinating the execution of Kustomize within the

>    init/join/upgrade workflows

Reviewer 3: since the work is going to start this cycle, i'd like to hear thoughts from everyone about how kubeadm will execute kustomize.

there are a couple of approaches we can take:
- shell-out to `kubectl -k` (like the addons POC).
- import kustomize in kubeadm.

there are pros and cons to both.

Author: agreed on "don't reinvent the wheel" (no matter if replicating code form kubectl, addons POC or kind), but this is an implementation detail we are going to sort it out in follow up PRs

4. as a consequence of the previous point, higher-level tools/users are not
   requested to take care of defining `kustomization.yaml` files nor to define
   a local folder structure.

Additionally, in order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this 
proposal is going to assume that Kustomize patches for kubeadm are always defined
specifically for the node where kubeadm is going to be executed.

This point could be reconsidered in the future, by e.g. introducing cluster-wide
patches and/or patches for a subset of nodes.

#### Providing and storing Kustomize patches to kubeadm

Before kubeadm init, Kustomize patches should be eventually provided to kubeadm
by higher-level tools/users; patches should be provided in a well know location

> like e.g. `/etc/kubernetes/kustomize` or in a custom location specified with a CLI flag. 

Reviewer 3: as noted in my discussions with Fabrizio, `/etc/kubernetes/kustomize` is tricky because it is a location managed by kubeadm, thus currently  `reset` would clean this location. then again the same goes for user certs copied to `../pki`.

Reviewer 2: I cannot help but think that there are two different set of patches we want to apply. Unless I'm missing some use case I think it would be reasonable for control planes to share the same configuration, so the set of patches to be applied on control plane components are saved cluster wide in a `ConfigMap`. Node specific patches could follow this approach of a well known location though, until we maybe evolve in something cluster-wide as well as described in the document.

Author: > /etc/kubernetes/kustomize is tricky

Removed. The user chooses its preferred location for patches

> I cannot help but think that there are two different set of patches we want to apply. 

Agreed but intentionally ruled out of this first iteration for sake of simplicity
see _"Additionally, in order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this 
proposal is going to assume that Kustomize patches for kubeadm are always defined
specifically for the node where kubeadm is going to be executed.

This point could be reconsidered in the future, by e.g. introducing cluster-wide
patches and/or patches for a subset of nodes."_

Eventually, in the future, this flag will be added to the kubeadm config API as well.

In order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this proposal is assuming
to use the same approach also for kubeadm join; this point could be reconsidered
in the future, by e.g. defining a method for allowing higher-level tools/users to
define Kustomize patches using a new CRD.

#### Storing and retrieving Kustomize patches for kubeadm

Kustomize patches, should be preserved during the whole cluster lifecycle, mainly
for allowing kubeadm to preserve changes during the kubeadm upgrade workflow.

In order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this proposal is assuming

> that Kustomize patches will remain stored in the `/etc/kubernetes/kustomize` or in a

Author: done. now the users have to specify where he wants to store kustomizations

custom location specified with a CLI flag for the necessary time; this point could
be reconsidered in the future, by e.g. defining a method for allowing higher-level
tools/users to define Kustomize patches using a new CRD.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: i think we need to cover the case - what happens if a patch no longer applies after upgrade.

Author: done

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 2: One not mentioned risk is what happens when some patches will not cleanly apply because of some component version change that modified the structure of an API object intended to be patched. Before the upgrade, `kubeadm` should probably check if the patch will apply cleanly with the newly generated configuration in a dry run. I think this is a risk and should probably be mentioned explicitly.

If this happens, we should request the user to update the patch  manually so it applies cleanly on the new base configuration.

Author: done. I'm proposing a less invasive approach (document, suggest to use --dry-run) but we can always reconsider this according to user feedback on the first implementation

_Confusion between kubeadm config API and kustomize_
Kubeadm already offers a way to implement cluster settings, that is the kubeadm API
and component configs. Adding a new feature for supporting “advanced configurations”
can create confusion in the users.

kubeadm maintainers should take care of making differences cristal clear in release notes
and feature announcement:

- The config API is well suited for most common use cases and it will remain the
  recommended way to define core settings for a cluster, while “advanced configurations”
  are designed for less common use cases.
- The config API implicitly defines the main cluster variants the kubeadm team is
  committed to support and monitor in the Kubernetes test grid, while instead higher-level
  tools/user are responsible for the security, conformance, consistency, of 
  “advanced configurations” for control-plane or kubelet settings. 

> _To not provide expected flexibility_

Reviewer 3: i think this title needs to define the problem.

i'd rename it to:
> Misleading expectations on the level of flexibility

or something similar.

Author: done

In order to provide guarantee about kubeadm respecting “advanced configurations” during
init, join, upgrades or single-phase execution, it is necessary to define some trade-offs
around _what_ can be customized and _how_.

Even if the proposed solution is based on the user feedback/issues, the kubeadm maintainers

> want to be sure the implemented is providing the expected level of flexibility and, in

Reviewer 3: the implemented - > the implementation?

order to ensure that, we will wait for at least one K8s release cycle for the users to provide 

> feedback before moving forward in graduating the feature. 

Reviewer 3: "the feature to beta."
?

Similarly, the kubeadm maintainers should work with [`etcdadm`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/etcdadm)
project and [`addons`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/addon-operators) project

> to ensure a consistent approach across different components.

Reviewer 3: in terms of consistency - the addons project will shell out to `kubectl -k`.

Author: see [a]; please note that what is really important here is to guarantee consistent UX for users - use kustomize everywhere -, while implementation detail IMO can be different among tools, even if not recommended

## Design Details

### Test Plan

> Add at least a new E2E periodic test exercising  “advanced configurations” during init,

Reviewer 3: > Add at least one periodic E2E test job...

> join and upgrades.

Reviewer 2: One mention, the surface we can test is really tiny as opposed to the really weird and possibly big combinations of patches that can happen in the wild... I think it's important to mention that we test that the patching is tested, not any kind of combination of patches themselves.

Author: done

### Graduation Criteria

> This proposal in its initial version covers only the creation of a new alpha features.

Reviewer 3: features. - > feature.

Graduation criteria will be defined in the following iterations on this proposal and
consider user feedback as well.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

As stated in goals, kubeadm will preserve “advanced configurations” during upgrades,
and more specifically, it will re-apply patches after each upgrade.

Downgrades are not supported by kubeadm, and not considered by this proposal.

### Version Skew Strategy

This proposal does not impact kubeadm compliance with official K8s version skew policy;
higher-level tools/user are responsible for the security, conformance, consistency of
“advanced configurations” that can impact or the aforementioned point.

## Implementation History

Tuesday, July 30, 2019
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started

## Drawbacks

Kubeadm already offers a way to implement cluster settings, that is the kubeadm API
and the support for providing component configs. Adding a new feature for supporting
“advanced configurations” can create confusion in the users.

> See risks and mitigations.

Reviewer 3: overall, i have concerns about the UX and i think the users might face difficulties.

while kustomize is becoming the standard of applying customizations in the k8s space it seems we are fighting the sandbox we created. i think we should be answering the questions of "why are we limit the API?" and "what do the users want from it?".

with the kubeadm API we have sandboxed the user to something that is maintainable for us and now we are exposing a mechanic to modify the sandbox. this might be difficult to manage for the users and will introduce some complexity on our side too. perhaps the sandbox should have not existed in the first place and instead we should have used the method of "sane and tested defaults, but still possible to use this API as a Swiss army knife".

Author: TBH, I think that those points should be discussed in the kubeadm office hours. 
For the track, my personal opinion on the first two questions

> "why are we limit the API?"

Past experience in managing kubeadm IMO already proved that accepting any kind of knobs as a CLI flag or config flags is not sustainable...

> "what do the users want from it?"

It depends. Some users want
- simplicity, and kubeadm already support this with the CLI and a limited set of flags.
- some flexibility, but with the right abstraction from all the internal, and kubeadm already support this with the kubeadm component configuration.
- the possibility to tune all the knobs for static pod manifests and this KEP is proposing a possible escape path for those users.

  - [User Stories](#user-stories)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Story 3](#story-3)
  - [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)
    - [Kustomize integration with kubeadm](#kustomize-integration-with-kubeadm)
    - [Providing and storing Kustomize patches to kubeadm](#providing-and-storing-kustomize-patches-to-kubeadm)
    - [Storing and retrieving Kustomize patches for kubeadm](#storing-and-retrieving-kustomize-patches-for-kubeadm)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] kubernetes/enhancements issue in release milestone, which links to KEP
- [x] KEP approvers have set the KEP status to `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented
- [x] Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input

> - [x] Graduation criteria is in place

Reviewer: Technically speaking, we don't have a clear graduation criteria ATM.

Kubernetes cluster via the Kubeadm component configuration or the corresponding CLI flags.

More specifically the kubeadm component configuration provides an abstraction that allows to:

1. To define configurations settings at cluster level using the `ClusterConfiguration`
   config object 
2. To define a limited set of configurations at the node level using the
   `NodeRegistrationOptions` object or the `localAPIEndpoint` object

This abstraction is well suited for the most common cluster configurations/use cases, but
there are other use cases that cannot be achieved with the kubeadm component configuration
as of today. Some examples:

- It is not possible to add sidecars e.g. for authorization web-hooks serving components.
- It is not possible to set/alter timeouts for liveness probes in control plane components.

This KEP aims to introduce a new feature that will eneable users full control of static 
pod manifest generated by Kubeadm at node level - vs the kubeadm component configuration
that allows mostly cluster-wide configurations on control-plane/etcd args only -.

With this new feature users should not be required anymore to manually alter static

> pod manifests stored into `/etc/kubernetes/manifests` after kubeadm init/join.

Author: done

### Goals

Considering the complexity of this topic, this document is expected to be subject
to some iterations. The goal of the current iteration is to:

- Get initial approval on Summary and Motivation paragraphs
- To identify a semantic for defining “advanced configurations” for control-plane/etcd
  static pod manifests.
- To define UX for passing “advanced configurations” to kubeadm init and to kubeadm join.
- To define mechanics, limitations, and constraints for preserving “advanced configurations”
  during cluster lifecycle and more specifically for supporting the kubeadm upgrade workflow.
- To ensure the proper functioning of “advanced configurations” with kubeadm phases.
- To clarify what is in the scope of kubeadm and what instead should be the responsibility
  of the users/of higher-level tools in the stack like e.g. cluster API 

### Non-Goals

- To provide any validation or guarantee about the security, conformance, 
  consistency, of “advanced configurations” for control-plane/etcd settings. 
  As it is already for `extraArgs` fields in the kubeadm component configuration or in the
  Kubelet/KubeProxy component config, the responsibility of proper usage of those 

>   advanced configuration options belongs to higher-level tools/user's.

Reviewer: `users`

5. `patchesJson6902` can't be used without a `kustomization.yaml` file defining `target`
   for a patch; this limitation is not considered blocking for starting implementation;
   however a solution for this problem should be defined before graduating to beta
   (e.g. require `kustomization.yaml` in case the users want to use `patchesJson6902`).

Additionally, in order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this 
proposal is going to assume that Kustomize patches for kubeadm are always defined
specifically for the node where kubeadm is going to be executed.

This point could be reconsidered in the future, by e.g. introducing cluster-wide
patches and/or patches for a subset of nodes.

The resulting workflow for using in kustomize will be the following

1. Create a folder with some patches, e.g.

```
mkdir kubeadm-patches

cat <<EOF >./kubeadm-patches/patch1.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: kube-apiserver
  namespace: kube-system
{your kube-apiserver patch here}
EOF

cat <<EOF >./kubeadm-patches/patch2.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: kube-controller-manager
  namespace: kube-system
{your kube-controller-manager patch here}

> EOF

Reviewer 4: Should there also be an example here for a net new static pod?

Author: @detiber I'm not sure what do you mean with "net new static pod". 

This feature targets only the 4 static pods manifests (3 in case of external etcd) created by kubeadm in the `/etcd/kubernetes/manifests` folder

#### Providing and storing Kustomize patches to kubeadm

Before kubeadm init, Kustomize patches should be eventually provided to kubeadm
by higher-level tools/users; patches should be defined in a custom location 
on the machine file system and this location could be passed to
kubeadm init/join with a CLI flag. 

In order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this proposal is assuming
to use the same approach also for kubeadm join; this point could be reconsidered
in the future, by e.g. defining a method for allowing higher-level tools/users to
define Kustomize patches using a new CRD.

#### Storing and retrieving Kustomize patches for kubeadm

Kustomize patches, should be preserved during the whole cluster lifecycle, mainly
for allowing kubeadm to preserve changes during the kubeadm upgrade workflow.

In order to simplify the first implementation of this KEP, this proposal is assuming
that Kustomize patches will remain stored in the custom location on the machine file system
for the necessary time, and that this location will be passed to kubeadm upgrade with a CLI 
flag; this point could be reconsidered in the future, by e.g. defining a method for

> allowing higher-level tools/users to define Kustomize patches using a new CRD.

Reviewer 4: How will the kustomize patches be applied?

Generally kustomize operates on a single yaml file applying all defined patches. Would this proposal mean that the currently generated static manifests would be merged into a single file prior to applying the kustomize patches first? 

Would they still be broken up before writing them to disk? If so, what are the plans for doing that splitting and for naming the resulting static manifest files? I'm assuming the existing static manifest file names would stay the same, but how would additional passed static pod files be named? 

Are there plans to vendor kustomize to do the patching operations or to shell out to `kubectl`? If the later, doesn't this introduce a new dependency on the `kubectl` binary that didn't exist previously?

Author: @detiber 

> How will the kustomize patches be applied? ...

In the [POC](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/80580) I'm exploring a different approach:
- read all the patches
- group patches by the target object (without using any naming conventions, we rely on TypeMeta/ObjetMeta embedded in patches)
- when rendering a static pod manifest, apply only relevant patches

>  how would additional passed static pod files be named?

ATM the KEP does not consider additional passed static pod, because of they out of the kubeadm responsibility. But if you can provide more details about your use case I'm more than open to reconsidering this (TBD if in this or in future iterations of this KEP)

> Are there plans to vendor kustomize

In the [POC](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/80580) I'm exploring vendoring, because it allows me to do the kustomize process in memory and have full control on it; I also agree with you that the resulting solution is self-contained, but there are different opinion on this, see e.g. https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1159#discussion_r305835694
